---
layout: post
title: "Starting a new Rust project right, with error-chain"
tags: [rust]
---

While I was preparing the [most recent release][r] of [error-chain], it dawned
on me that not everyone knows the magic of error-chain, the little Rust library
that makes it easy to handle errors correctly. Error handling is
front-and-center in Rust, it's subtly complex, and it's important for the health
of a project, and the sanity of its maintainers, that error handling is done
right. Right from the start.

The first thing I do - really, the very first - when starting any project in
Rust is deciding the error handling strategy. And with error-chain, I know up
front exactly what I'm going to do, and that it's going to work reasonably well.

So this post is to demonstrate what I consider the basic best practice for
setting up error handling in Rust. If you follow these simple instructions right
from the start you will have all your error scaffolding set up in a way that
will scale as your project grows across many crates, no thinking required.

The error-chain [quickstart.rs] file demonstrates a simple, but powerful
application set up with error-chain. It's suitable for using as a template -
just literally copy that file to your main.rs and you will have an application
set up for robust error handling.

I'll reproduce it here in its entirety:

```rust
// Simple and robust error handling with error-chain!
// Use this as a template for new projects.

// `error_chain!` can recurse deeply
#![recursion_limit = "1024"]

// Import the macro. Don't forget to add `error-chain` in your
// `Cargo.toml`!
#[macro_use]
extern crate error_chain;

// We'll put our errors in an `errors` module, and other modules in
// this crate will `use errors::*;` to get access to everything
// `error_chain!` creates.
mod errors {
    // Create the Error, ErrorKind, ResultExt, and Result types
    error_chain! { }
}

use errors::*;

fn main() {
    if let Err(ref e) = run() {
        println!("error: {}", e);

        for e in e.iter().skip(1) {
            println!("caused by: {}", e);
        }

        // The backtrace is not always generated. Try to run this example
        // with `RUST_BACKTRACE=1`.
        if let Some(backtrace) = e.backtrace() {
            println!("backtrace: {:?}", backtrace);
        }

        ::std::process::exit(1);
    }
}

// Most functions will return the `Result` type, imported from the
// `errors` module. It is a typedef of the standard `Result` type
// for which the error type is always our own `Error`.
fn run() -> Result<()> {
    use std::fs::File;

    // This operation will fail
    File::open("contacts")
        .chain_err(|| "unable to open contacts file")?;

    Ok(())
}
```

It's fairly self-explanatory, but I do want to point out a few things about it.
First, that main function:

```rust
fn main() {
    if let Err(ref e) = run() {
        println!("error: {}", e);

        for e in e.iter().skip(1) {
            println!("caused by: {}", e);
        }

        // The backtrace is not always generated. Try to run this example
        // with `RUST_BACKTRACE=1`.
        if let Some(backtrace) = e.backtrace() {
            println!("backtrace: {:?}", backtrace);
        }

        ::std::process::exit(1);
    }
}
```

This is typical of the main functions I write lately. The whole purpose is to
immediately delegate to a function that participates in error handling (returns
our custom `Result` and `Error` types), and then to handle those errors. This
error handling routine demonstrates the three pieces of information that
error-chain delivers from an error: the proximate error, here the `e` binding;
the causal _chain_ of errors that led to that error; and the backtrace of the
original error. Depending on your use case you may not bother with the
backtraces, or you may add in a call to `catch_unwind` to deal with panicks.

If you run this example you'll see the following output:

```
error: unable to open contacts file
caused by: The system cannot find the file specified. (os error 2)
```

This demonstrates the raison d'être for error-chain: capturing and reporting the
chain of multiple errors that led to the program failing. The reason we see both
the final error and its cause is because in our `run` function we _chained_ two
errors together:

```rust
fn run() -> Result<()> {
    use std::fs::File;

    // This operation will fail
    File::open("contacts")
        .chain_err(|| "unable to open contacts file")?;

    Ok(())
}
```

That call to `chain_err` produced a new error with our application-specific
error message, while storing the original error generated by `File::open` in the
error chain. This is a simple example, but you can imagine in large scale
applications the error chain can get quite detailed.

That's how you get started with error-chain, but that's not everything it
does. For more read the [docs].

## error-chain best practices

Just a few quick notes about how I use error-chain.

When I'm hacking I don't hesitate to just use strings as errors, which can be
generated easily ala `bail!("I don't like this: {}", nonsense)`. These are
represented as `ErrorKind::Msg`, a variant defined for all error types generated
by the `error_chain!` macro.

For applications, strings are often perfectly fine as the error type. When you
are designing an API for public consumption though, that's when defining your
error types (using the `error_chain!` `errors { }` block) becomes important.
Having typed error variants gives consumers of your library something to match
on. error-chain gives you the option of doing the easy thing or the hard thing,
it scales with the needs of your code.

Do put your `error_chain!` invocation inside an `errors` module and import the
entire contents with `use errors::*`. Glob imports aren't something you want to
do a lot, but in this case the pattern is worth it: you really just want these
four types to be at hand in every module of a crate.

I try to avoid using `foreign_links { }` blocks and consider them a code smell.
They are easy to set up and make errors outside your control easy to
interoperate with, but by taking the automatic conversion you lose the
opportunity to add additional error semantics appropriate for your local
application domain. That is, instead of returning an error of "the system cannot
find the file specified", I want to return an error "failed to open contacts
file" that is _caused by_ "the system cannot find the file specified". Every
link in the error chain adds more-specific semantic information as it gets
closer to the root of the call stack. So instead of using `?` on a foreign
error, use `chain_err` to give more context.

error-chain really shines once you start building up a constellation of crates
all using the error-chain strategy, all linked together via the `error_chain!`
`links { }` blocks. Linked error-chain errors are able to propagate backtraces
and have a structural shape that is easy to deeply match, so that e.g.
your error that originated in your `utils` crate, bubbled through your `net`
crate, then up through your `app` crate is easy to pinpoint through pattern
matching like so:

```rust
// Imagine these are crates, not mods
mod utils {
    error_chain! {
        errors { Parse }
    }
}

mod net {
    error_chain! {
        links {
            Utils(::utils::Error, ::utils::ErrorKind);
        }
    }
}

mod app {
    error_chain! {
        links {
            Net(::net::Error, ::net::ErrorKind);
        }
    }

    pub fn run() -> Result<()> {
        match do_something() {
            Err(ErrorKind::Net(::net::ErrorKind::Utils(::utils::ErrorKind::Parse), _)) => {
                ...                                                                                   
            }
            _ => { ... }
        }
    }
}
```

This kind of deep error dispatching doesn't happen often, but when it does, it's
nice that error-chain makes it easy. Again, error-chain lets you start simple,
but gives you power as your project grows.

## TL;DR

When you start writing a new Rust application, one of the first things you
should ask is "how am I going to handle errors?"; and the answer should
_probably_ be "I'm just going to set up error-chain". Configure error-chain
using the [quickstart.rs] example, and don't worry about a thing.

For more information about error-chain read the [docs].

[r]: https://users.rust-lang.org/t/announcing-error-chain-a-library-for-consistent-and-reliable-rust-error-handling/6133/30
[error-chain]: https://github.com/brson/error-chain
[quickstart.rs]: https://github.com/brson/error-chain/blob/master/examples/quickstart.rs
[docs]: https://docs.rs/error-chain/0.7.1/error_chain/
