---
layout: post
title: Presenting the Rust quotes from the Mozilla QDB
tags: [rust]
---

Early Rust development was coordinated on the Mozilla IRC network,
and back then we had the Mozilla "QDB" (quotes database),
which once lived at quotes.burntelectrons.org,
maintained by Grey Hodge.

That site no longer exists and the database no longer available.

For a number of years I quested to get a copy of it,
and then I got a copy of it,
and then I just sat on it for a few more years.

But now I've extracted the Rust quotes and made them available again
at [https://brson.github.io/rust-qdb/](https://brson.github.io/rust-qdb/).

It's been years since I've seen these.
Here are some choice memories:


---

> <erickt> is it just me, or did compiling rust just become a lot slower?<br/>
> <brson> compiling rustc became a lot slower because it grew my almost 9kloc this week<br/>
> <erickt> Sad. It now seems to take a minute+ to link a stage on my laptop<br/>
> <pcwalton> hopefully CCI will help<br/>
> <erickt> what's that?<br/>
> <pcwalton> cross-crate inlining<br/>
> <pcwalton> the reason that rust grew 9kloc<br/>

Submitted 2/29/2012

---

> <rntz> "match (match ...) { ... }" aha, finally my favorite SML idiom comes to rust<br/>
> <graydon> we'll be linear ML yet if it kills us<br/>
> <graydon> (with macros. in BCPL clothing.)<br/>
> <graydon> (how did this happen?)<br/>
> <rntz> well...<br/>
> <rntz> it's linear ML because: you hired a bunch of PL geeks to help make a language, what did you expect?<br/>
> <rntz> it has macros because: you hired a bunch of PL geeks to help make a language, what did you expect?<br/>
> <rntz> it looks like BCPL because: you need to convert the C++ programmers, apparently<br/>

Submitted 12/5/2012 

---

> <pcwalton> Luqman: I think we should put a limit on the levenshtein distance ;)<br/>
> <pcwalton> /Users/pwalton/Source/rust/master/src/libcore/task/local_data.rs:85:17: 85:34 error: unresolved name: `rt::rust_get_task`. Did you mean: `modify_fn`?<br/>

Submitted 2/28/2013

---

> <mib_lyavkj> So, who thought it was a good idea to name this language after iron oxide?<br/>
> <aatch> mib_lyavkj, no idea, who though it was a good idea to name a language after a letter in the alphabet?<br/>
> <mib_lyavkj> Exactly!<br/>
> <aatch> Or a family of snakes, or crystalline aluminium oxide<br/>
> <mib_lyavkj> I'd much rather use rust or Go, but at least python sounds cool! Hardly anyone creates cool names for these things.<br/>
> <aatch> Well there are three languages named after one guy.<br/>
> <brendanc> You're talking about Dylan Oberon Pascal?<br/>

Submitted 11/28/2013

---



The source for this repo is at
[https://github.com/brson/rust-qdb](https://github.com/brson/rust-qdb),
and I have also taken the liberty of including the full raw database dump
if others want to dig through it for e.g. non-rust stuff.

All the thanks to Grey Hodge
who responded to my emails,
dug up the database dump and the source code and provided it to me.
